<!-- slug: hawaii -->
Hawaii (Hawaiian: Hawaiʻi, sometimes pronounced ha-VAI-ee by locals) is the 50th state of the United States. Situated nearly at the center of the north Pacific Ocean, Hawaii marks the northeast corner of Polynesia. While it was once a major hub for the whaling, sugar and pineapple industries, it is now economically dependent on tourism and the U.S. military. The natural beauty of the islands continues to be one of Hawaii's greatest assets. Honolulu is the state's capital, largest city, and cultural hub. Hawaiian and English are the official languages of Hawaii.

==Islands==
Hawaii is an archipelago of over 19 volcanic islands spread over a geological "hot spot" in the Central Pacific. The Pacific plate on which the islands ride moves to the northwest, so in general the islands are older and smaller (due to erosion) as you move from southeast to northwest. There are eight major islands, six of which are open to tourism.

==Cities==
The term "cities" is used here in a broad sense. Hawaii has no organized government below the county level. All communities that would be thought of as cities, towns, and the like in the rest of the US are merely "census-designated places", statistical entities established by the United States Census Bureau.

- – state capital and most-populous community
- – on Oahu
- – on Oahu
- (Hawaiian: Līhuʻe) – on Kauai
- (Hawaiian: Lāhainā) – on Maui
- – on Maui
- – on Maui
- – largest community on the Big Island
- – on the Big Island

== Other destinations ==

- on the Big Island.
- on Maui
- on the Big Island
- on Moloka‘i
- on the Big Island
- on O‘ahu
- on Kaua‘i
- on O‘ahu

==Understand==

The island of Oahu, the most populous and home to the state capital and largest city of Honolulu, is great for people who wish to experience the islands and still keep the conveniences of a large city. Rainforests and hiking trails are minutes from Waikiki Beach, one of the world's best tourist destinations. In the winter, large waves on Oahu's north shore turn the normally sleepy area into the surfing capital of the world.

On the other hand, those who wish to experience Hawaii at a slower pace would do well to visit one of the Neighbor Islands (the other, less populated islands around Oahu). All the Neighbor Islands offer opportunities to relax and enjoy the sun and scenery. Many of the natural wonders of the islands are on the Neighbor Islands, from Waimea Canyon on Kauai, to Haleakala on Maui, to Hawaii Volcanoes National Park on the Big Island of Hawaii. Numerous waterfalls and rainforests evoke memories of what the islands might have looked like before major corporations set their sights on Hawaii.  The road to Hana is one of the most scenic on Maui, as you manipulate many turns overlooking the Eastern coast of the island.  It leads you over bridges and past beautiful waterfalls.  You can end up at the Oheo Gulch Pools (which are not sacred and there are more than seven), where the hiking is quite the experience.

Several islands are recovering from severe and deadly wildfires in 2023.  While some fire-affected areas remain closed to the public, visitation continues to be welcomed and encouraged throughout Maui and the islands of Kauaʻi, Oʻahu, Lānaʻi, Molokaʻi and Hawaiʻi Island.

===History===
Polynesians migrated to, and established communities on, the islands of Hawaii around 800 CE, part of the great expansion of Austronesian peoples that also populated most other Pacific islands.

Captain James Cook was the first European visitor to the islands, arriving in 1778. At that time, each island was a separate kingdom. With the support of Western advisors and weapons, Kamehameha I of the island of Hawaii conquered all the islands except Kauai, which acquiesced to his rule in 1810.

After Kamehameha II abolished the kapu (taboo) system, American missionaries came to the islands to spread Christianity. As the Native Hawaiians did not have any concept of owning land, the missionaries became official land owners of many of the islands. Their children became successful businessmen in the Islands and still own entire islands to this day. Pineapple and sugar cane plantations were established, and workers from other countries (in particular Japan, the Philippines, China, Korea and Portugal) were imported as contract laborers. Their descendants also became established as successful professionals.

The Hawaiian monarchy was overthrown in 1893 by a group of American businessmen. While the U.S. administration at the time refused to annex the former sovereign nation, in 1898 the United States did annex the islands, which became a territory in 1900, and a state of the United States in 1959.

Hawaii also became an important outpost for the U.S. military through the 20th century, and Pearl Harbor was the site of the Japanese attack on December 7, 1941, that resulted in the U.S. joining World War II (see Pacific War). Today, the military maintains its presence here, with several major military bases on the island of Oahu alone; Pearl Harbor remains the headquarters of the U.S. Pacific Fleet.

Over the years, many major retail chains have expanded their presence in Hawaii, making the Islands look more and more like the continental United States, often at the expense of local businesses. Nevertheless, Hawaii remains culturally vibrant. Its population, descended from the Native Hawaiians, the original plantation workers, and more recent arrivals, and in which no one group has a majority, is often cited as an example of multiculturalism at its best. There is a strong commitment to perpetuating Native Hawaiian cultural traditions, and the cultural heritage of Hawaii's many immigrant communities from the Pacific, Asia and Europe. And certainly the environment is conducive to longevity. Hawaii has the longest predicted life expectancies of any U.S. state.

===Climate===

Depending on where you are in Hawaii, the weather can be very different over even short distances. On the same day, on Oahu you might find sun over the beaches in Waikiki and rain only a few miles away in Manoa Valley.

Although the islands receive abundant amounts of both sunshine and rain, rain is more likely on the north and east sides of the islands, which face the prevailing northeasterly tradewinds (the "windward" side of the island), as well as the mountain peaks and valleys. The moist tropical air carried by the tradewinds is forced upward by the mountains, resulting in clouds and rain. Rain is less likely on the coastal areas of the "leeward" sides (the south and west sides) of the islands.

Although there are no true "seasons" in the islands in the same sense as the rest of the U.S., the climate does go through annual cycles based on rainfall. The "wet" season in Hawaii (cooler temperatures and more rainfall) runs roughly from October to March, and the "dry" season (warmer temperatures and less rainfall) from April to September. There is therefore a higher probability of rain if you visit during the peak of tourist season in late December or January.

Hurricane season in the islands runs from June to November. Although Hawaii's relative isolation means that it is affected only rarely by tropical cyclones, one of the storms or its remnants does hit or skirt the Islands every couple of years, such as Hurricanes Iwa and Iniki hitting Kauai in 1982 and 1992 respectively.

Overall, Hawaii is warm and balmy — when you step out of the plane you'll immediately notice that the air is soft and humid — and during the summer months the tradewinds provide a pleasant breeze. Daytime temperatures generally range from the low 70s (21°C) in "winter" to the mid 80s (27°C) in "summer". Very rarely does the air temperature exceed 90°F (32°C) even in the hottest part of summer; however, the humidity will make it feel as if it were a few degrees hotter. Ocean temperatures range between 73°F (23°C) degrees in the winter to 78°F (25.5°C) in the summer. There is usually no more than a 20°F (12°C) difference between daytime high and nighttime low temperatures.

Consequently, besides your driver's license, credit card, camera, binoculars, and other essentials, it's best to keep your clothes to a minimum... one or two pair of washable slacks/shorts, light shirts, walking shoes, sandals and swim gear. A light jacket or sweater may be necessary depending on when and where you go, but heavy clothing is not normally necessary in most areas. Sunscreen is essential since Hawaii's close proximity to the Equator translates into very strong sun radiation. The suitcase space you save can be used to fill up on island purchases.

Although the above is true for most of the Islands, you will find exceptions. A good rule to remember is the higher the elevation, the cooler it will be. Upcountry areas of Kauai, Maui and the Big Island will be cooler during the day, in the 60s F, and much colder at night, in the 40s F. At the highest elevations on Maui and the Big Island, temperatures can drop to near freezing in places like Haleakala National Park, Volcanoes National Park, and Mauna Kea. On the Big Island, both of the largest mountains, Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa, can receive snowfall year around, mostly in the winter, and can even experience blizzard conditions.

There is more of a difference from the day-to-night temperatures in Hawaii than there is summer-to-winter. Given that, there can be more of a difference from lower elevations to higher elevations than either of those, depending on where you are visiting. It's important to research the areas you plan to visit and bring clothing suitable for those conditions.

===Best times to go===
Hawaii's tropical weather tends to be most attractive to tourists when the weather is frightfully cold at home. It's not surprising, then, that the peak tourist season in Hawaii is the Northern Hemisphere winter (mid-December to mid-April). The highest prices tend to be during the Christmas and New Year's season, with a second peak around spring break in March and April. Hawaii's weather is at its best (not too hot and not too cold, with not so much rain) in April, May, September, and October — as it happens, this is also the period when some of the best deals can be had.

===Holidays===
Hawaii observes all the federal holidays, except Columbus Day. It adds Prince Kuhio Day on March 26th, Good Friday (two days before Western Easter), King Kamehameha Day on June 11, Statehood Day on the 3rd Friday in August, and Election Day (in even-numbered years only, always on a Tuesday, from November 2nd to 8th).  Also, some cities and towns that have a large population of federal workers or military personnel might observe Columbus Day anyway.

===Visitor information ===
- Go Hawaii website

==Talk==

Hawaiian and English are the official languages of Hawaii, albeit with English being the predominant language. However, if you encounter someone fluent in Hawaiian or learning the language and speak a few words of Hawaiian you'll instantly find yourself much more appreciated than the average tourist. Japanese is common in the tourism industry due to the large number of Japanese tourists who visit, as well as the large Japanese-American community in the state. There are also many communities that speak Mandarin, Cantonese, Tagalog, Ilocano, Vietnamese, Korean and Samoan.

Hawaiian Pidgin English, usually just called Pidgin, is a creole that many locals grew up speaking which incorporates bits of Hawaiian, Chinese, Japanese, Tagalog, Portuguese and many other languages, in addition to its own unique idioms.  It has a unique sound and feel. You will most likely hear Pidgin spoken on the street by Islanders in informal situations; it is Hawaii's language of everyday life.

There are some subtle differences in English usage in Hawaii. Learning a few words of Hawaiian can be fun and useful. Some signs in Hawaii use Hawaiian words, and most street signs use Hawaiian names. Some useful words include:

; Hello : Aloha. (ah-LOH-hah)
; Goodbye : Aloha. (ah-LOH-hah)
; love : aloha (ah-LOH-hah) (So you indirectly refer to "love" when you first see someone and when they have to go.)
; Thank you. : Mahalo. (mah-HAH-loh) (Although this word is found on fast food trash receptacles around the islands, it does not mean "trash".)
; finished, done : pau (pow)
; help/respect : kokua (koh-KOO-ah)
; woman : wahine (vah-HEE-neh)
; man : kāne (KAH-neh)
; child : keiki (KAY-kee)
; local resident : kamaʻaina (kah-mah-EYE-nah)
; toward the mountains : mauka (MOW-kah, MOW rhymes with pow)
; toward the ocean : makai (mah-KIGH)
; appetizer : pupu ("POO-poo")
; delicious : ono ("oh-no")

===Shaka===

The shaka sign is a hand gesture often used in Hawaii and adopted by surfers. To make a shaka, make a fist with your hand, and extend the thumb and smallest finger. Many people emphasize it by rotating their hand back and forth (along the arm, as if turning a doorknob).

There's not an exact meaning to the shaka, but it generally conveys "aloha spirit". Drivers frequently sign the shaka to say "thank you" to another driver.

==Get in==

Foreign travelers entering Hawaii directly from another country are subject to the same entry requirements as for the United States in general. See the Get in section of the United States article.

As Hawaii is one of the 50 United States, flights between Hawaii and other states are considered domestic flights. Therefore, you never need to show a passport or other documentation when arriving in Hawaii from the U.S. Mainland. When leaving Hawaii on a domestic flight, you only need to show approved picture ID, which for foreign visitors would typically be a passport.

Hawaii has requirements to control the flow of plants and animals. The islands have unique plant and animal life found nowhere else. They also have diseases and pests not found on the U.S. Mainland, and are free of other diseases and pests that are commonly found elsewhere. Because of this, Hawaii is an agricultural quarantine zone. For travelers, this means three things:

- You are required by the Hawaii State Department of Agriculture to fill out a written agricultural declaration while aboard your flight to Hawaii. One declaration form is required per family; the forms will be collected before landing. Any fresh fruits, vegetables, flowers, and the like must be declared and inspected by Department of Agriculture personnel at your port of arrival; some items may be prohibited from entering Hawaii. Penalties for non-compliance are stiff. To avoid delays and hassles, avoid bringing such items with you. (On the reverse side of this declaration is a Hawaii Tourism Authority questionnaire that asks for information about your stay. You are encouraged but not required to complete this questionnaire.)
- When leaving Hawaii for the U.S. Mainland, all baggage (checked and carry-on) must be inspected by U.S. Department of Agriculture inspectors at the airport. With the exception of pineapples and treated papayas (pawpaw), any fresh fruits (grown in Hawaii or elsewhere) are prohibited from leaving Hawaii to control the spread of fruit flies. Consult the U.S. Department of Agriculture for more details. Depending on the airport you leave from and the airline, be prepared to submit to as many as three X-ray checkpoints on the way to your Mainland flight: having your checked bags X-rayed in the ticket lobby, the TSA security checkpoint, and perhaps a separate agricultural inspection for your carry-on bags on the way to your gate. That last checkpoint will probably have a sign that says, "Yes, you have to do this again...."
- As Hawaii is rabies-free, pets such as dogs and cats are subject to complex and strict quarantine requirements. The least restrictive provisions (direct airport release or 5-day maximum quarantine) require at least two rabies vaccinations at least thirty days apart and at least 90 days before arrival, the latest of which must be current; microchip implantation; and a negative rabies blood test within the last three years, but at least 120 days before arrival. Pets failing to meet these requirements will be subject to quarantine for up to 120 days. 

Hawaii does not observe Daylight Saving Time, which means that the time difference between Hawaii and most of North America varies by the time of year. Hawaii is two time zones behind the U.S. West Coast, thereby accounting for a three-hour time difference during DST for most states. 

Travelers from Asia, Australia, and New Zealand should keep the International Date Line in mind when doing time conversions and flight reservations.  Hawaii is 19 hours behind Japan, making it five hours ahead of Japan by the clock, but a day behind on the calendar. Most flights to Hawaii that leave Asia in the evening will arrive in the morning of the same day, and return flights that leave Hawaii in the morning will arrive in the early afternoon of the next day.

===By plane===

Most flights from the mainland U.S. and almost all international flights land in Honolulu on the island of Oahu. From here, passengers destined for a neighbor island will connect to an interisland flight (see By Plane in Get Around below). Nonstop service from the mainland is also available to Kahului on Maui, Kona and Hilo on the Big Island, and Lihue on Kauai.  Kona also serves a limited number of non-stop flights from Japan, and seasonal service from Canada.

Depending on the airline, nonstop flights to Honolulu leave from most major gateway airports on the West Coast (as well as some smaller ones), as well as many major airports in the Midwest and East Coast. The flight from Los Angeles or San Francisco takes about 5 hours, which is comparable to a flight between the West and East Coasts of the contiguous United States. Thus, a flight from New York will take about 10½ hours.

Jetstar is a budget Australian airline that connects Honolulu to several cities in Australia. From Southeast Asia, there are also low-cost airlines from Kuala Lumpur, Singapore and Manila with AirAsia X.

===By boat===

There are a few trans-Pacific cruises to Hawaii that leave from ports on the West Coast. On an 18-day,  round-trip cruise between Hawaii and the West Coast, about 12 of those days will be at sea, with nothing on the horizon and nothing to do except what is on the ship. Even if you are an avid cruiser, you may get more Hawaii bang from your cruise buck by flying to Honolulu and taking a seven-day interisland cruise that starts and leaves from there. Pacific Ocean cruises to and from California depart for the most part from mid-fall to mid-spring. (See Get around: By boat for more info on the regular cruises from the Mainland.)

There are a few freighter services, but if you are an American citizen embarking in the United States and wishing to travel to Hawaii then you cannot travel this way on a foreign-flagged ship due to the U.S. Passenger Vessel Services Act of 1886. Instead, try cruises from Ensenada, Baja California or Vancouver, British Columbia.

It is also worthwhile to troll marinas on the West Coast of the contiguous United States, leaving your contact info and posting to online discussion boards for people planning to spend around a month sailing from the mainland. Ensure that any expectation of compensation including work duties, food, supplies, and damaged equipment is covered in writing so everything is clear.  Storms and days stuck becalmed are to be expected.

==Get around==
===By plane===
Air travel is, by and large, compulsory for traveling within the state. Travelers can choose from either a scheduled or unscheduled air carrier.

Three scheduled inter-island air carriers, Hawaiian Airlines, Mokulele Airlines, and Southwest Airlines, provide set scheduled flights between the islands. You can save money and time by planning "triangle routes" that arrive in Hawaii on one island and leave on another, avoiding the cost of a return inter-island flight.

Scheduled flight times run anywhere from 20 minutes to one hour, and can usually be purchased a day or two before departure, although this may increase the cost of traveling.

Visitors wanting to fly according to their own demand (as opposed to scheduled times) should consider flying on an unscheduled air carrier also known as air taxi service. Contact the air carrier directly and arrange a time and place for pick up. Iolani Air and Big Island Air are two such air carriers.

The Hawaiian islands are populated with airstrips that scheduled carriers do not service. In these instances air taxi companies may be the only means of traveling.

Hunters and campers with cumbersome gear planning trips to remote island regions, as well as visitors wishing to "island hop", should consider air taxi service.

===By boat===
In general, ferry services between the islands are few and far between, and many are not a practical means of transportation. 

Charter boats sail and motor between some islands, especially the Maui-Molokai-Lanai area. Crossing the channels between islands can be extremely rough going. A few charter companies specialize in having boats delivered interisland and can meet you at your destination. A company offering ferries is Expeditions (Maui–Lana'i $30 one way for adults and $20 for children).

Norwegian Cruise Lines operates a cruise ship, Pride of America, between the islands, embarking and disembarking in Honolulu. 

Inquire at nearby marinas about joining the crew of a local sailboat or yacht out for a cruise.

===By bus===
On Oahu there is an excellent public transportation system on TheBus for bus travel between Honolulu, Waikiki, Kaneohe, and the surrounding suburban and rural areas of Oahu. You can buy a booklet called "TheBus" at a local ABC Store giving route information on how to get around the island or online on TheBus.org or download "DaBus2" app on a mobile device. Public transportation is limited on the neighboring islands, so renting a car makes sense. There are some bus services available within and between populated areas on the other islands.  They are:
- Hele-On (Hilo, Kona, Waimea and around the big island of Hawai'i)
- Kaua'i Bus (Kauai)
- Maui Bus (Kahului, Wailuku, Lahaina, and other places in western Maui. No service to the Haleakala NP in the eastern part of the island).

No regular bus services on Molokai or Lanai.

Information on transit can be found here.

===By car===

If you want to take your car to Hawaii, it will either need to be amphibious or freighted by ship with very high cost, making this infeasible unless you plan a long-term stay in Hawaii. However, Hawaii is the only state that honors all other U.S. state vehicle licenses until they expire, provided you apply for a permit within 10 days of the car's arrival. (Incidentally, Hawaii is also the only state that does not require intended residents to exchange their out-of-state driver's licenses.)

Car rentals should be booked as soon as possible since, as elsewhere in the US, the price charged is based on a supply/demand basis. The exception is Waikiki where you will not need a car on a permanent basis so just rent a car the day before you want one. Some hotels may charge you for car parking; check with your hotel for parking fees before you book your car.

Gasoline, while nowhere near the prices charged in Europe, is more expensive in Hawaii than in many areas of the Mainland. There was a time when gas prices in Hawaii were much more expensive than other states. Nowadays, however, average prices are comparable to San Francisco and Los Angeles, and are sometimes below those cities. Expect to pay about 20-25% more than the average price on the Mainland for gasoline in Honolulu. Neighbor Island prices can be as much as 10-15% above that.

The major highways are referred to by number (H-1, H-2, and H-3; they're never called "I-H-1" etc.), but most locals refer to other roads not by number but by name, and will likely not understand if you ask for a road by number. For example, you would never hear someone refer to Kalanianaole Highway as "route 72" or "highway 72."

If you ask for directions, they will likely not be given in terms of compass direction. Instead you will probably receive relative directions based on landmarks. Common landmarks include mauka (toward the mountains), makai (toward the ocean), and on Oahu, ʻEwa (toward Ewa Beach, roughly west) and Diamond Head (toward Diamond Head, roughly east). So a query for a grocery store might be met with "go two blocks makai, turn right on King and it's half a mile up on the mauka side of the street."

===By moped, scooter or motorcycle===

Scooters are also an excellent alternative for getting around the islands. Rental rates are fairly cheap: about $50/day, or $135 for three days, which you can sometimes haggle down. The scooters are also fun to ride and are cheap on gas (typical mileage is 60&ndash;100&nbsp;mpg, or 2.3&ndash;3.9&nbsp;L/100&nbsp;km). You can ride them anywhere except on limited-access highways (of which there aren't many in Hawaii, and there's always a surface street that's probably more scenic).

Scooters only require a valid license for driving a car, not a motorcycle license. The driver must be over 15 (legally out-of-state license aren't acceptable unless the driver is 18, but this is rarely enforced). It's illegal for two or more persons to ride a moped, although this may not be enforced in more remote areas such as Big Island. Helmets are not mandatory, but if you want one (which is always a good idea) you should be able to rent one with your scooter, possibly for free. When you get your scooter, inspect it first, as some are in bad repair: make sure the headlights and turn signals are working, and insist on taking it for a quick spin around the block to check that the acceleration, transmission, brakes, and steering are okay. If anything is amiss, insist on a replacement scooter, or walk away from the deal and find another rental company.

Scooters that can go over 30&nbsp;mph or have an engine larger than 49&nbsp;cc are classified the same as motorcycles, so you need a motorcycle license. Motorcycle rentals are easy to find. On most islands, you can also rent out Harley-Davidson motorcycles.

===By bicycle===
Depending on where you travel a bicycle can be a great form of transportation if you keep a few things in mind.  Some roads are very narrow and winding which may create a hazard when sharing the road with cars.  There are also some steep hills as Hawaii is a series of mountains erupting from the sea; without a topo map an apparent shortcut may require a challenging hill while a long loop may be flat and avoid large terrain getting you there quicker. If you stay near the beach there is the salty sea air and rain which will eventually rust a bicycle which is kept outside, keep on top of chain and part maintenance and cleaning to prevent damage.  Honolulu has a bicycle registration law requiring a tag for $15, and bicycles without registration can be impounded by police. The law and common sense require a white front and red rear light when operating a bicycle during twilight and night. Many airlines charge an oversized luggage fee for most full size bikes even when boxed; some tour-capable folding bikes can be fit inside a standard suitcase, but most public transportation does not allow bicycles at all.

== See ==

== Do ==

The Hawaiian islands offer a vast number of activities.  Hiking and eco tours are popular on most islands, with opportunities for horseback riding, ATV, air tours, and other methods of exploring the landscape.  Museums and historical sites such as Pearl Harbor are also to be found throughout the islands. Cultural activities such as the Polynesian Cultural Center on Oahu also make for interesting day-long activities.

Oahu is famous for Pearl Harbor tours, but also popular are shark dives in cages, Waikiki snorkel tours as well as around Oahu Tours where you will see all the major highlights of Oahu including Diamond Head, the North Shore and Dole Plantation where you can sample menu items made from fresh picked pineapples.

Maui is the location for humpback whale watching from December 15 to April 15 each year as the massive humpbacks migrate to Hawaii's warm waters to bear their calves. Also famous from Maui is the Molokini Crater which is a partially submerged volcano crater that you can snorkel at.

Kauai is untamed and beautiful. It has been featured in many major motion pictures over the past two decades (Hook, Jurassic Park, Tropic Thunder, The Descendants, Avatar, and many more). See this island by land or by air to take in the true beauty of this island. Oh and just be ready to see the roaming Roosters that inhabit the island.

You can take a land tour or fly over the incredible huge volcano on a helicopter tour of the Big Island. Doors-off flights allow you to feel the heat from the volcano, an amazingly unique experience. Also on the Big Island you have the rare opportunity to swim with wild dolphins, not captive ones.

Hawaii is best known for its beaches and water activities.  Surfing is practically a religion in Hawaii, and scuba diving and snorkeling opportunities exist nearly everywhere.  In addition, jet skiing, parasailing and kayaking are available in tourist areas.

Since many of the islands' tours and excursions are interacting with nature in some way, it's important to look into each and make sure they are respecting the islands. There are many endangered animals and plants, and because of this there are many laws protecting them. An example would be tour boats that have been fined for chasing dolphins or whales in order to please the tourists, which is illegal and highly disrespectful. Govern yourself the same way while you visit and remember to "kokua na `aina," or respect the land.

==Buy==

As in the rest of the United States, U.S. dollars are the local currency. There are plenty of banks, ATMs, and money change offices in all cities. However, none of the major American and foreign banks have branches in Hawaii, so the banking sector is served exclusively by local banks, the largest of which are Bank of Hawaii, First Hawaiian Bank, and American Savings Bank. ATMs are scarcer on the North Shore of Oahu and other rural areas. 

Because Hawaii is an island state and transporting goods to Hawaii is more difficult, the prices for most goods are more expensive.  Under federal law, most goods manufactured overseas in Asia must bypass Hawaii and go directly to the West Coast of the United States.  They are brought to Hawaii on another ship, and the prices must include that cost of that second ship. 

Hawaii has a 4.166% General Excise Tax (GET), which many retailers pass through like a sales tax on their receipts. The City and County of Honolulu adds an additional amount, making the tax rate on Oahu 4.712%.  The GET is not a sales tax because it is imposed on all business receipts in Hawaii.  It is another reason why retail prices in Hawaii are so high, because they must include the GET paid by a Hawaii-based manufacturer, wholesaler, or distributor and passed through to the retailer.

===Clothing===

Other than the stereotypical grass skirt (which is not generally worn in Hawaii except by hula dancers), no pieces of clothing are more associated with the Islands than the aloha shirt and the muʻumuʻu.

The ever-present aloha shirt comes in a wide variety of designs. On one end, there are the brightly colored, tourist-oriented, polyester aloha shirts that many tourist-oriented stores throughout the Islands carry. On the other end of the spectrum are reverse print aloha shirts, which have become standard business attire among businessmen in Hawaii, in the same way that the business suit is on the mainland. These aloha shirts are usually cotton-polyester blend with the design printed on the inside of the shirt, resulting in muted colors that are considered businesslike in Hawaii. This kind of aloha shirt can be found in department stores.

For women, the muʻumuʻu (English: "muumuu") is a long Hawaiian dress, usually made of cotton, that hangs loosely from the shoulder.

A special note on shoes: the lightweight sandal commonly referred to on the Mainland as a "flip-flop" or "thong" is known as a "slipper" or "slippa" in Hawaii. Using the mainland term will get you a quizzical look from locals.  Call them by their island name and they will instantly know what you are talking about.

===Made in Hawaii===

Locally made bath & body products are popular souvenirs. The islands feature some of the most refreshing fragrances, which are featured in Hawaiian shampoos, body lotions, soaps, oils, incense and floating candles.

==Eat==
Contemporary food in Hawaii, like the language and popular culture, is a medley of traditional Hawaiian, Portuguese, American, and Asia-Pacific flavors. Pacific "fusion" cuisine was largely invented in Hawaii. Well-known local chefs include Sam Choy, Alan Wong, Russell Siu, Roy Yamaguchi, and George "Chef Mavro" Mavrothalassitis. Seafood is, of course, fresh and tasty. Local beef comes from ranches on Maui and coffee is grown on the Big Island and Kauai. Tropical fruits such as pineapple, mango, bananas, guavas, and papaya, as well as fresh sugar cane, can be bought in most corner stores (although you may be surprised to learn that many of those fruits are now imported from distant locales such as the Philippines and Brazil).

One of the most common ways that local food is served is in the form of plate lunch, usually meat or fish with two scoops of rice and macaroni salad. It's always a good deal at any lunch wagon, mall, or outside food court. L&L Drive Inn and Zippy's are probably the most widely distributed chain of plate lunch spots in the Hawaiian islands. Branches of L&L are in some locations on the Mainland as well (as L&L Hawaiian Barbecue).

Another way of enjoying local food when roaming around the island is to keep an eye out for the converted trucks or vans that are parked in their regular spots in gas station parking lots, some parks and a variety of places on the island. These lunch wagons offer plate lunches, are popular with the locals and provide great meals (on plastic plates) at very reasonable prices. There is no reason to fear them; they are very common and popular. Food carts provide other kinds of cuisine besides the standard plate lunch.

You may be surprised to find that even the McDonald's menu is different. Saimin, a Hawaiian noodle soup inspired by Chinese noodle soups, is a permanent menu item, and was the first regional food to be served in a McDonald's. Another favorite is the breakfast platter at Hawaiian McD's, which features Portuguese sausage, Spam, eggs, and steamed rice, sometimes with fresh pineapple. (Contrary to its poor reputation on the mainland, Spam has traditionally been very popular in Hawaii and is even used in various adapted ethnic dishes.) Also, red fruit punch is a non-carbonated fruit-flavored alternative to Coke or Sprite at the soda fountain.

Perhaps the best setting for tourists to enjoy traditional Hawaiian food is at a luau (lū‘au), a traditional Hawaiian feast. Tourists can find luaus at various locations in the Islands, including many of the major resort hotels. At a modern luau, traditional Hawaiian favorites are served as a pūpū (buffet of appetizers and small main dishes, similar in size to Spanish tapas, which gave its name to the American Chinese "pupu platter"), along with Hawaiian music, hula, and other Polynesian entertainment. The downside is that prices vary in the expensive range; expect to pay between $50 and $90 per adult and about half that per child.

Dishes that are often found at luaus include:
- Lomi salmon, salted salmon hand-mixed (lomi-lomi means "to massage") with tomatoes, onions, and pepper; like an island salsa
- Kālua pig, pork wrapped in banana leaves and steamed inside an imu (ground boiler); similar to pulled pork
- Pipi kāula, Hawaiian style beef jerky
- Poi, ground and boiled taro root paste
- Laulau, pork and butterfish (black cod) wrapped in ti plant leaves then steamed
- Lū‘au, taro leaves baked with coconut cream and usually octopus (this dish inspired the modern name of the Hawaiian feast)
- Haupia, a gelatin-like dessert prepared from thickened coconut milk; famous for being a very mild laxative

Other local dishes include favorites such as the following:

- Poke, chopped and seasoned raw fish (like a tartare), eaten by itself or over sushi rice.
- ʻAhi, yellowfin tuna, excellent as sashimi (Japanese style sliced raw fish) or as poke.
- Mahimahi, dolphin fish, served as a steak, sandwich, or in almost-raw thin strips.
- Ono, a type of fish also known as wahoo. Not coincidentally, the name resembles the Hawaiian word for "delicious," ʻono.
- Shave ice, an island version of snow cones made from finely shaved ice, comes in lots of ʻono flavors. Order your shave ice with azuki beans and/or a scoop of ice cream.
- Saimin, Hawaii's version of a Chinese noodle soup. 
- Malasada, fried bread rolled in plenty of sugar, a sort of Portuguese donut. Often sold at special events.
- Manapua, local name for a popular type of Chinese dim sum otherwise known as char siu bao. Cured sweet pork wrapped in soft white bread.
- Spam musubi, an unorthodox variant of Japanese riceballs (musubi), composed of salted rice formed into a rectangular shape and topped with spam, wrapped in seaweed. Popular enough to be sold in every Hawaiian 7-Eleven.
- Chicken/pork adobo, Filipino dish widely offered and appreciated in Hawaii, where the meat is marinated and then cooked in vinegar and soy sauce.
- Loco moco, a local specialty consisting of a hamburger patty on rice, topped with over easy egg and gravy. Excellent with tabasco sauce. Can be eaten for breakfast or lunch.
- Chicken katsu, fried chicken cutlet with savory sauce. Usually served with rice and mac salad.

If you are roaming the island away from tourist areas, you may find restaurants are scarce. Many of the numerous golf courses have dining rooms open to the public that offer great meals. They seem to welcome the non-golfer. For specific places at which to eat, see the individual island or city articles. Be sure to check the coupon books that are available at display stands for meal specials.

Popular local snacks are also heavily influenced by the large mix of cultures present in Hawaii, primarily the Chinese and Japanese. Since many of these snacks are unique to Hawaii and cannot be found anywhere else, consider purchasing a few bags from any grocery store to bring on your travels. A large portion of local snacks fall under the category known as "Crack Seed" which refers to a variety of pickled, candied, and dehydrated fruit snacks of Chinese origin.

The most popular iterations of Crack Seed snacks are:

- Li hing mui - Salted dried plums that are especially popular with the younger locals. Li Hing Mui is known for its unique sweet, salty, and sour flavor. It is commercially sold either with the plum seed intact or seedless and also in a powdered form that can be sprinkled onto arare, fruits, gummy bears, and many other snacks.
- Pickled or dried fruits - Mangoes are usually dehydrated for a sweet snack or kept wet and flavored with Li Hing Mui powder. Lemon and orange peels are also salted and dried for a salty/sour snack.

Other popular local snacks include:
- Arare - Japanese rice crackers flavored with soy sauce that come in many different shapes and sizes. Arare is commonly paired with dried seaweed, li hing mui powder, or popcorn. Also commonly referred to as "Kaki Mochi" or "Mochi Crunch".
- Dried Seafood - Dried cuttlefish and octopus strips, known by their Japanese names "Ika" and "Tako", are very popular snacks. Tuna, or "Ahi", is also dried and made into Ahi Jerky.
- Macadamia nuts - Originally brought over from Australia, where they are a part of Aboriginal cuisine, but first grown commercially in Hawaii. Dry roasted macadamia nuts are commercially sold plain, with flavoring, or in chocolate. Macadamia nuts in snack form are more popular with tourists than with locals and are usually given as gifts.

If you would rather catch your own, fishing in the ocean or gathering in tidepools is free and requires no permit. Fresh-water fishing, however, does require a license.

==Drink==

Beer: there are a number of excellent local brewpubs in Hawaii. Mehana, Sam Choy's, Honu, Waimea Brewing Company, Liz's Pub, Keoki's and Kona Brewing Company all brew beer in Hawaii or brew it on the mainland and ship it to the islands. The largest of the group is Kona Brewing, which has won several national awards and runs two brew pub restaurants in the islands (one in Kailua Kona, the other in Hawaii Kai on Oahu).
Cocktails: The mai tai is said to have been invented in California, but it's long since been adopted by Hawaii and is well worth trying there.

==Sleep==
Resorts: There are many resorts in Hawaii. Waikiki is famous for its beach and nightlife but is an urban neighborhood, so not necessarily what you might think of as a resort. There are other resorts on the Kona Coast of the Big Island, such as in Waikoloa Village, in Maui, or at Turtle Bay on the northern tip of the Big Island, where there is a resort that is widely known for its sunsets.

AirBnB: It is illegal to list or use AirBnBs outside of tourist districts due to laws on minimum rental periods. Both the person staying and the person listing their unit can be fined up to $10,000 per day they violate this law.

==Learn==

Tourists who want to get a taste of Hawaiian culture can sign up for classes in hula, surfing and lei-making at most tourist destinations.

There are also a number of cultural and historical centers on Oahu well worth your time, such as the Bishop Museum and Iolani Palace.

If you have the money, the time and the inclination, the Polynesian Cultural Center provides a window into Polynesian culture. As its name implies, the Polynesian Cultural Center covers not just Hawaii but also the cultures of Tahiti, Fiji, Samoa, Tonga, Easter Island and the Maori people of New Zealand.

The outer islands also have destinations such as Maui Center for Culture and the Arts and the Big Island has the Hilo Art Museum. the Lyman House Museum and the Pacific Tsunami Museum as well as the University of Hawaii's ʻImiloa Astronomy Center and Kula Kai Caverns.

For those on a budget, there are many activities you can do on any island that are free. All state parks are free to visit and even some National Parks. When the National Parks are not free, most find them very affordable. Hiking, beaches, snorkeling and other like activities are always free when on public land and there are no private beaches. On the Big Island there are many free ranger programs at Kaloko-Honokohau National Historical park and other locations. At the Visitor Information Station on Mauna Kea, you can stay any night of the year between 6PM and 10PM and enjoy a free astronomy tour including large and small telescopes for you to look through. Some hiking and other activities are in National Parks, like Volcanoes so they are at cost, of course.

==Work==

The unemployment rate in Hawaii is generally below the average unemployment rate for the country as a whole in Mar 2019, 2.8% vs 3.8%). Hawaii is not an easy place to legally find casual work for non-US work permit holders. To apply for a local government job, by law you must be a Hawaii resident.

==Stay safe==

Theft is a big problem in cities as well as beaches and parks. If you are camping on a beach, keep bags locked in a car (but don't assume that they are safe in the trunk, especially if you are driving a rental) and keep valuables in a hidden money belt. Although Hawaii is generally considered relatively safe, it does have some violent crime. Consequently, women should not walk alone in unlit areas. Although Honolulu has one of the lowest violent crime rates of metro areas in the U.S., use your common sense.  Stay smart and act as if you were in your own home city: lock doors, lock cars, and don't leave valuables lying around.  Some campgrounds now require a permit (this has the effect of moving homeless people away from tourist areas). Be sure to apply for a reserved area and have your permit even in free camping areas especially around Honolulu.

Any of the beaches are vulnerable to pickpockets and thieves who break into cars. If you are using a rental car, it is advised you buy a bumper sticker or two to make it seem like you are a local. Paradoxically, keeping the car windows open will prevent break-ins and car damage, as the locals will think there is nothing of worth in the car. As a rule of thumb, do not bring anything to the beach you do not plan on using. If you must bring money, bring a friend to keep it safe.

If you are planning a hike in the mountains, monitor local weather reports carefully and use extreme caution in case of rain. Rain is more likely in the mountains, and flash flooding can occur near stream beds with little or no warning. Unsuspecting hikers can drown and be swept downstream.

===Civil defense sirens===

Although it is rather rare, the threat of a natural disaster can occur at any time in Hawaii, sometimes with little or no warning. Besides the occasional destructive lava flow on the Big Island and occasionally destructive hurricanes (see Weather in Understand above), Hawaii can also experience tsunamis and earthquakes.
In 1960 the Great Chilean Earthquake (magnitude 9.5) generated a destructive tsunami that devastated Hilo on the Big Island, killing 61 people. In 1992, Hurricane Iniki made a direct hit on Kauai, killing six and causing $1.8 billion in damage. In 2006, most of the state was affected by a magnitude 6.7 quake off Kailua-Kona. No casualties were reported, but it caused extensive property damage and power outages of up to 14 hours on Oahu.

Hawaii has a highly developed civil defense system. High-pitched civil defense sirens are tested statewide at 11:45AM on the first working day of each month unless hazardous weather is occurring. Two tones may be tested: a steady alert siren used in the event of imminent natural disaster such as a tsunami, and a wailing tone that oscillates in pitch from high to low, to be used in the event of confirmed, imminent enemy attack.

If you hear the steady tone siren go off at any other time, turn on the nearest radio or television set for emergency information.  In the unlikely event you hear the wailing tone go off at any time, seek shelter immediately and stay there, and stay tuned to radio or TV for further instructions.

===Natural disasters===
If a hurricane or tropical storm is expected, you will usually have at least several days' notice, and local media will pass on advisories, watches, and warnings from the National Weather Service. Your hotel will likely have emergency plans; check with them for advice and stay indoors during the high winds and rain that accompany a tropical cyclone.

If a tsunami is expected, you will only have several hours' notice. Either evacuate coastal areas subject to inundation (this includes most of Waikiki), or failing that, find the nearest concrete high-rise hotel and go to the third story or above. Follow the instructions of police and first responders at all times. If ordered to evacuate an area, do so quickly.

==Stay healthy==
Hospitals in Hawaii meet U.S. standards for care, and can be found in the urban areas of each island. The hospitals in Honolulu are larger and have the most advanced equipment; the hospitals on the neighbor islands provide general care. There is a shortage of specialists on the Neighbor Islands. Depending on where you are and how serious your condition is, you may have to be medically evacuated to Honolulu for treatment. All tourists, including U.S. citizens, should have travel insurance with medi-evac coverage, which can get you back home, if needed.

The main tourist areas of each island have walk-in urgent care clinics where you can receive non-emergency treatment for whatever ails you.  Some clinics even make hotel room calls. Check with the local phone book or your hotel.  In Waikiki, try Doctors on Call (+1 808-971-6000).  The clinic is open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.

Pharmacies can also be found in most major shopping areas. Mainland customers of CVS who need assistance with prescriptions should look for the nearest branch of Longs Drugs (the former pharmacy chain had such high brand recognition in Hawaii that CVS chose to retain the brand on its Hawaii locations). Walgreens has opened numerous locations.

If you go hiking in the backcountry or go swimming in freshwater pools in Hawaii, you risk catching leptospirosis.  Leptospirosis generally causes flu-like symptoms; in rare cases it can be fatal; the incubation period can be from 2-30 days after exposure. Do not swim in freshwater pools if you have open sores; see a doctor if you develop flu-like symptoms after hiking or swimming. If you do not have open sores and swim in these areas, the best way to avoid Leptospirosis or any bacteria is to never drink any natural water, no matter how clean it looks. If you are backpacking and this is a must, remember to bring the needed water filters and/or iodine pills to treat your water.

Be sure to have travel health insurance.  If you are a U.S. resident with private health insurance, you should consult your insurance carrier to determine what co-payments apply and to what extent your insurance is accepted in Hawaii by doctors and hospitals in the event you need health care while on your trip. However, if you get a job in Hawaii - even a part-time job - you will receive health insurance by state law (presuming that you are a U.S. citizen or have a green card and are therefore legally eligible to work). See Stay healthy in United States of America for more information.

If you have respiratory problems, be aware of volcanic smog (also known as vog). Vog is formed when sulfur dioxide gas from Kilauea mixes with sunlight, water, and dust particles to form a haze made up primarily of sulfur compounds. Normally the northeasterly trade winds blow vog away from the rest of the islands. Southeasterly winds (also known as Kona winds in Hawaii), however, can blow vog toward the other islands. Vog can be a nearly constant presence on the Big Island. While many people in Hawaii can experience symptoms related to vog, it can especially affect those with asthma or other chronic respiratory illness. If you have a respiratory condition and plan to visit the Big Island, consult your doctor for advice.

When going to the beach or swimming, always wear sunscreen lotion or sun guard to protect your skin from burns, as well as hats, covers and sunglasses. The islands are far closer to the equator than most tourists understand, so even if the weather is cooler, the sun's power is still more intense.

==Cope==
===Dress===
Hawaii's laid-back reputation extends to dress: with ideal weather year-round in most places, shorts are always appropriate around the islands. Long pants are fine, too, and you will still be quite comfortable. You do normally need to wear a shirt in public; going bare-chested is for the beach, although businesses near the beach are tolerant of it, particularly outside of the city. Sandals and flip-flops are always fine for casual wear, but they're always called slippers or slippa by locals. Going barefoot off the beach is not common in the cities, but again, businesses tolerate it to some extent.

Hawaii has many of the Earth's climates on each small island. Research the locations you plan to visit and dress accordingly, as some areas like Volcanoes National Park or Mauna Kea on the Big Island, or Haleakala National Park on Maui will leave you miserable in shorts and tank tops, as they may have below freezing weather, drenching rain and even snow.

For the beach or pool, boardshorts or swimming trunks for men are the most popular, though with so many visitors from Asia, speedos are welcome too. Female toplessness is legal in Hawaii, if uncommon. Swimming nude is illegal, although there are a few isolated beaches on each island where people risk it. Unless you're spending the day trekking from beach to beach, save beachwear for the beach and wear regular clothes.

Businessmen in Hawaii forgo suits and wear slacks with muted aloha shirts. As a visitor, you would be overdressed in a suit; a dress shirt (with or without a tie) and slacks would be fine. If you do wear an aloha shirt for business, pair it with khaki pants or slacks, socks, and dress shoes or loafers, and button all but the top button while at the office. Normally aloha shirts are worn untucked and without an undershirt, but those aspects are up to you.

The business aloha shirt extends also to dressing up for fine dining, entertainment, and even church; some preachers wear business aloha shirts for church services. As a visitor, just put on a collared shirt, shoes (such as casual loafers), and, depending on the restaurant you're going to, either shorts or slacks. Ties and jackets will never be necessary.

==Respect==

In general, American standards of etiquette (see Respect in United States of America) apply in Hawaii. Hawaii does however have certain cultural differences, owing to the Native Hawaiians and the large population of Asians and people of Asian descent.

- As is the custom in many Asian countries, always remove your footwear when entering the home of an island resident, if so invited.  Shoes and sandals are generally left on the front porch or just inside the front door.
- Hawaiian culture should be respected and travelers should be sensitive to the state's rich cultural heritage and diversity — and the fact that the tourist experience of Hawaiian culture may only scratch the surface. For instance, there are many heiau (temples) in the Islands, where the ancient Hawaiian religion was practiced. Some of these have become tourist attractions in their own right, but visitors should nevertheless treat these places with the same level of respect one would show at a place of worship. To show respect, do not horseplay, rearrange or move any item, and never, ever take any item, including rocks and sand, with you. 
- If you visit Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, you will no doubt hear about Pele, the Hawaiian goddess of volcanoes. An urban legend has it that people who have taken volcanic rock from Hawai'i, not just the park, have suffered various misfortunes; it is believed that it is the wrath of Pele. In any case, it is illegal to take rocks or other material from a national park. It is also unethical and looked down upon to take any rocks, sand or other natural items from the islands, for religious, moral and environmental reasons alike. Take only pictures, leave only footprints.
- Native Hawaiians do not identify as Native Americans, as they are culturally and historically distinct from people indigenous to the continental United States. Just stick to the term "Native Hawaiian".
- The status of Native Hawaiians vis-a-vis the U.S. federal government has become a hot topic, with some Native Hawaiian groups seeking a degree of sovereignty for the Hawaiian people as redress for the overthrow of the Hawaiian monarchy and U.S. annexation in the 1890s. (Honolulu is home to the only royal palace on U.S. soil.) There is no consensus among Native Hawaiians on what form this sovereignty should take, with some preferring the status quo of ordinary citizenship, some seeking a status similar to that of Native Americans, and some wanting complete independence and secession from the Union. In addition, private and government programs that benefit Native Hawaiians have been called into question via a series of lawsuits that have received extensive coverage in local media.  Discussions of Hawaiian sovereignty and programs can arouse a variety of strong opinions (both in support and in opposition) among Hawaii residents of all ethnicities, and the uninitiated visitor would be wise to avoid bringing up these topics in casual conversation.

With that in mind, there are some subtle differences in English word usage. When talking with Hawaii residents, be aware of the following differences in word usage to avoid miscommunications.
- Always refer to the continental United States as "the Mainland" rather than "the States." Hawaii has been one of "the States" since 1959, and the Hawaiian sovereignty movement notwithstanding (see above), most Hawaii residents are proud to be part of the United States. This is especially true for Japanese-Americans, many of whose relatives served in the celebrated 100th/442nd unit in World War II.  Using the term "the States" (implying that Hawaii is somehow foreign) may be seen as naive at best and condescending at worst. However, don't be surprised if some local people are condescending towards you because you are from the mainland. The "local" vs. "mainland" difference is something local people are only too happy to point out. 
- Residents of Hawaii do not necessarily consider themselves "Hawaiian." For instance, when asking a Hawaii resident, "Are you a native Hawaiian?" don't be surprised if his reply is "No, I'm Japanese." (Ask instead, "Were you born and raised in Hawaii?") On the Mainland, for example, "Californian" means any person who lives in (or has ties to) California. However, in Hawaii, the terms "Hawaiian" or "native Hawaiian" are reserved to mean someone who is descended from the indigenous people of Hawaii. This definition even appears in state laws. Because Hawaii is made of people of various ethnicities, someone whose family may have lived in Hawaii for generations may still not be Hawaiian by the above definition. To avoid misunderstanding, it is best to refer to Hawaii residents as such: "Islanders", "locals", or "kamaʻaina", unless you know for a fact that they are of native Hawaiian descent.

Some Native Hawaiians may attribute accidents caused by nature (such as a landslide at Sacred Falls that killed several people) to the Menehune punishing tourists disrespecting the land. Menehune or not, Hawaii is one of the most beautiful places in the world and its sites deserve our respect. Bottom line: respect the land and the people; there may be more there than meets the eye.

==Connect==
===Post===
Hawaii uses the U.S. Postal Service with zip codes 96701-96898 and a state code of "HI".  Postage in Hawaii uses the same rates as the mainland, and is considered domestic for all postal purposes.  First class and priority mail do not experience delays, but ground shipments can be much slower.  Private companies FedEx and UPS are present in Hawaii, express shipment times are the same, but add 2-3 days for ground shipments.

===Internet===
Free Wi-Fi is widely available, and can easily be found in most cafes and shopping centers. All major hotels offer free Wi-Fi for guests, and it is available at most airports. Public computers are available at public libraries for library cardholders; visitors may purchase a 3-month library card for $10.

===Phone===
Hawaii's area code is 808.  All 10 digits must be dialed when making local calls.  When dialing any off-island telephone number, dial 1 + area code + phone number.  You must include the 808 area code when calling another island.  Long distance charges to the mainland, if any, are usually the same standard domestic rates as it would be if calling within the 48 contiguous states.  Check with your phone/long distance company to be sure.

==Go next==
As Hawaii is in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, the state has few nearby neighbors.

- California - The point of departure for many visitors from the continental United States. San Francisco is over 150 miles closer than Los Angeles because it's much further west. A few other California cities also have non-stop flights as well.
- Oceania - Hawaii can be a stepping off point to explore the many islands of the Pacific as well as the countries of Australia and New Zealand.
- Japan
